Edit Instructions: These edits are organized by page. GENERAL contains broader edits that will effect multiple pages, then each page has its own section. For pages with slides, the number before edits indicates what slide the edit should be made on. Text within <> are further inline instructions.

GENERAL:


For all slide pages (introduction, methodology, findings, agentic coding), ensure that the screen scrolls back to the top when clicking the “Previous” or “Next” buttons in the slides.

For all text, if referencing another part of the project, hyperlink to that project’s page on that word.


HUB PAGE: fm_presentation.


Change “What is Network Sense?” card to “Introduction”


Change the new “Introduction” card’s description from “Mueller’s framework…” to “The goals, scope, and background of this Black Box Network Sense.”


Change the “Agentic Coding” description text from “Reflection on AI…” to “Reflections on the power of agentic coding in this project and its impact on authorship.”


Change the “Split Heatmaps” description text to start with “A toggleable heatmap comparing…:”


Change the “About This Presentation” section to the following:


This interactive hub guides you through how agentic coding tools assisted a distant reading analysis of First Monday (1996-2025), exploring how core rhetoric and composition concepts have evolved alongside emerging internet studies terminology. Each page is self-contained, explore in any order or follow along a more traditional route with the navigation buttons at the bottom of each page.

<ADD AN AI DISCLAIMER BANNER in the style of the hero card, see the banner in texts/first_monday/ for an example : “The author acknowledges the use of OpenAI's ChatGPT 5 and Anthropic's Claude Sonnet 4 / Claude Code 2.0.31 in generating the infrastructure, data scraping tools, visualizations, and isolated text used in this project. AI-generated text appears most prominently in the Methodology section and in various low-stakes titles, labels, or descriptions created when building out the site. No AI-generated insights or conclusions were included unless explicitly cited otherwise, and all final content was written or reviewed by the author. Thorough details of how AI was used in this project is covered in the Methodology and Agentic Coding Applications sections.”>

What you’ll find: Four pages consist of slide-style presentations introducing the project, its methodology, and its key takeaways. Below, five individual pages contain graphs and charts showcasing the projects data in different ways.


<the rest can stay the same>.


INTRODUCTION: fm_presentation_network-sense


1


Change the start of the third paragraph to: “Assisted with the AI coding agent Claude Code at every step, this..”

2


Change “less impractical” to “less practical”

Move “The problem needs a different approach.” to its own line.


3


No changes.




4


Add strategic bolding to the bullets on this slide.


5


No changes


METHODOLOGY: fm_presentation_methodology


3


Change “OpenAI’s ChatGPT the general..” to “OpenAI’s ChatGPT is the general..”


4


Change “Another slide giving the AI a voice, given that it built everything it would be most capable at explaining how everything works” to “Another slide giving the AI a voice, this summary is Claude Code’s explanation of how this site was constructed. Note that in the “AI’s Role” section, “I” refers to the author, not Claude.”


5 


Remove the entire paragraph “All dates were normalized….”


Remove “Text generated by Claude Code, edited by author (Anthropic, 2025).


6
Change the introduction to this slide to: “The last of the major pieces of AI-generated text appearing in this project, the descriptions of the four primary visualization types reveal different aspects of the n-gram patterns.”


Change “, allowing for quick identification of disciplinary shifts.” to “, allowing a bird’s eye view of disciplinary trends.”


Add to the citation at the bottom: “Text generated by Claude Code, edited by author (Anthropic, 2025). Note: While other AI-generated slides were a pre-planned rhetorical choice, I originally set out to write this slide. I soon realized I was changing the mostly fine automatically generated placeholder text only to avoid having too much of the project be AI-generated. In the end, I decided these descriptions were adequate and to only make minor edits to this slide, otherwise leaving it as is.”


FINDINGS: fm_presentation_findings


1
Add bolding/emphasis to “did reveal evidence of concurrent turns in the journal related to adjacent terms.”


Hyperlink the word “hub page” back to the hub page.


REFLECTIONS: fm_presentation_agentic-coding


2


Add emphasis to “Text highlight in green”


8


Adjust the second bullet to end in “meaning the added findings are entirely hallucinated.” and add emphasis to the quoted text.


STACKED AREA: fm_presentation_frequency-stacked-area/


Adjust the text to: “Each colored band shows one term’s raw frequency (total occurrences) across the journal’s history. The collective height reveals how scholarly attention to all ten concepts together has evolved. Core RhetComp terms (Rhetoric, Writing, Composition) maintain a persistent if limited presence, while Identity and Discourse surge in the 2000s–2010s. Internet studies terminology (Digital Media, Online Communities) shows more recent emergence, tracking the field’s adaptation to technological change. Hover over a band for more details.”


INDIVIDUAL TERM TRAJECTORIES: fm_presentation_term-trajectories/


Adjust the text to: “Each line graph in this gallery shows one term’s raw frequency (total occurrences) across the journal’s history. Note that these graphs are not normalized along the y axis; these charts are better for understanding individual trends within a term rather than comparing to each other.”


BUBBLE CHARTS: /fm_presentation_bubble-charts/


No changes


Unigram/Bigram HEATMAPS: fm_presentation_heatmap-toggle/

Remove the word “paired” from “reveals how paired concepts gained…”


NORMALIZED MAP: /texts/fm_presentation_normalized-heatmap/


No Changes