Overview


Scope and Framework


Reflections


All referenced previews are located at C:\Users\ferra\DevProjects\Garrett-Ferrara-GitHubPage\assets\previews


Make the following edits to all relevant artifacts:


Remove the “Download PDF” button; the PDF preview already has this functionality.


Make the following edits to these artifacts:


1 


LLM Reputational Risk Inquiry


Change the preview card image to LLM_Inquiry_1.jpg


On the artifact page, add the preview image to the right of the description, role, date, tags, and Explore the Project button.

Rename to Brand Reputation in the Post–Search Web: Part I

Change description to: “A proof-of-concept analysis exploring how LLMs shape reputational risk in household brands through sentiment analysis and hallucination detection.”


Change Role to: Student / Independent Researcher


Add “Course: ENC 6952 - Rhetoric and Composition Graduate Capstone”


Change date to: December 2025


Change the tags to LLM Evaluation, Academic Writing, Data Visualization


Change the main text of the artifact page to the following:


Overview


This digital text compares LLM responses from ChatGPT, Claude, and DeepSeek concerning two home improvement retail competitors - Home Depot and Lowe’s. It is the first proof of concept in an investigation into whether training biases in LLMs present differing levels of reputational risk to competing household brands in a world where ChatGPT and similar tools have replaced traditional search engines for users conducting research about a company. After building a tool to query different LLM providers with prompts designed to probe for harmful hallucinations, I needed to find a way to parse through the responses.


This first stage tested whether sentiment analysis or rudimentary, semantic-based hallucination detectors would be useful in yielding actionable insights Though neither analysis method I tested succeeded to the degree I had hoped for, I did come away with the following key findings:


* Sentiment scores were broadly similar for both competitors in prompts sent to the same model. ChatGPT and Claude averaged slightly negative in their responses, while DeepSeek scored significantly more negative.


* DeepSeek’s increased negativity likely stems from less effective guardrails that cause ChatGPT and Claude to stop answering problematic prompts.


* All three models produced hallucinations with damaging claims for both competitors. Responses speculating on scandals and lawsuits generated the most egregious hallucinations.


Scope and Framework


The data used in this project comes from test queries comparing ChatGPT (gpt-4o), Claude (claude-sonnet-4), and DeepSeek (deepseek-chat) responses across four information requirements:


PIR 1.01 - Past and Present Scandal Hallucinations: Do any AI models hallucinate past or present scandals?
PIR 1.02 - Negative Sentiment Exaggeration: Do models exaggerate or invent negative public sentiment?
PIR 1.03 - ESG Hallucinations: Does the model hallucinate ESG-related accusations (greenwashing, labor issues, etc.)?
PIR 1.04 - Legal Exposure Speculation: Do LLMs speculate inaccurately about legal exposure?


After collecting all responses, the I analyzed the responses across three dimensions:


1. Sentiment Analysis: Whether responses used negative, positive, or neutral language.
2. Factual Verification: Cross-referencing claims against publicly available sources.
3. Comparative Analysis: Identifying patterns and variance across models and subjects.

Reflections


This project emerged at the exigence of three coinciding factors in my life during the summer of 2025:


* My position as the managing editor of a company providing open-source intelligence consulting on online risks was eliminated. Expecting a lengthy job search given market conditions, I wanted to use the time to build new skills and identify untapped market opportunities.
* Claude Code released on Windows, presenting an opportunity to use my existing Claude subscription to refresh scripting skills that languished in the editorial-heavy environment I was coming from..
* I needed a fresh research project for the final semester of my Master’s, as I was coming off a multiple-semester break and suddenly had the opportunity to attend classes full-time.


Thanks to my new coworker Claude Code, building the tool to prompt different LLMs was simple, but I soon found myself with thousands upon thousands of responses for a variety of household brands and no clear direction on how to parse the results into useful findings. While exploring ways to analyze the data, the social listening tool Meltwater announced a similar product called [GenAI Lens](https://www.meltwater.com/en/blog/announcing-genai-lens-llm-monitoring). No longer having the opportunity to be first to market, I let the idea fall aside to focus on other projects.


The exigence that sparked revisiting this project came from a multimodal assignment with broad parameters. I already had the data needed, and I had just finished working through Derek Mueller’s Network Sense in a different class, arming me with new direction on how to handle the large dataset.


More than anything else, revisiting this project helped build back some momentum. It forced me to re-engage the technical side of my skillset, to experiment without worrying about being “first to market,” and to let the work evolve into something that matched the scope of a capstone rather than a startup.


In the next stage of this project, I plan on testing new methods of parsing the data, including four more models in the analysis, and investigating how I can measure whether the prompts I measured are effective and producing responses as they might appear “out in the wild” when users are querying these systems.


2


Black Box Network Sense


Change the role to Student / Independent Researcher


Change the tags to LLM Evaluation, Academic Writing, Data Visualization, Digital Humanities


Add “Course: ENC 5920 - Colloquium in Rhetoric and Composition”


Replace the “Explore the Presentation” link at the bottom with a cta style button similar to the one used in Brand Reputation in the Post–Search Web: Part I.


Change the main text of the artifact page to the following:


Overview


“Black Box Network Sense” is an interactive research presentation that combines disciplinary analysis with agentic coding methodology. The project explores how core rhetoric and composition concepts have evolved within First Monday (1996–2025), a leading peer-reviewed journal in Internet Studies. The goal of this project was to produce interactive visualizations that explored the best ways to visualize Rhetoric and Composition as a discipline within or adjacent to internet studies.


Analyzing five interactive charts built from the data collected, the project revealed the following key finding


* Visualizations revealed no turns explicitly toward or away from core terms representing explicit Rhetoric and Composition affiliation, such as "Writing", "Rhetoric", and "Composition", though visualizations did reveal evidence of concurrent turns in the journal related to adjacent terms.


* Phenomena most prominently displayed and worth further investigation include strong turns toward "Identity" and "Digital Media", potential turns away from "Writing" and "Digital Divide", and spikes in the terms "Discourse" and "Civic Engagement" during election years.


Beyond these key research findings, the project also showcases academic collaboration with AI, with examples for others to inspire their own AI workflows.




Scope and Framework


This project emerged in three phases. The first was to build an ethical scraper to create a corpus of the entire First Monday journal’s history. The resulting dataset spans 1996 through 2025 and 2,710 articles across 359 issues.


Once the data was collected, the next step was to organize and analyze the data. I used WordStat to obtain the frequencies of ten n-grams related to Rhetoric and compositions. The terms and their definitions are described below:


Unigrams:
Identity - Individual representation in text and online contexts.
Discourse - Communicative practices that exchange and evaluate ideas.
Writing - Composition practice, written expression, authorship, and textual production.
Rhetoric - Theories and studies exploring the contexts and impacts of communication
Composition - Writing instruction, curriculum, and the discipline of composition studies.
Bigrams:
Digital media - Electronic communication and text platforms.
Digital divide - Technological access inequality and access disparities
Public Sphere - Open and social areas for societal discourse
Online communities - virtual collectives connected by digital platforms
Civic Engagement - Political participation, activism, and collective action


In the last stage of the project, I assembled the digital text itself, with four “slideshow” style text pages and five different chart types exploring n-gram frequency analysis:


Stacked Area: Combined frequency trends across all key terms
Term Trajectories: Individual term frequency with trendlines
Bubble Charts: Multidimensional analysis of term prevalence.
Temporal Heatmaps: Comparative heatmaps showing term prevalence.
Peak Normalized Heatmap: A separate version of the heatmap normalized as a percentage of peak maximum.


Reflections


Before diving into a formal reflection, I want to highlight one aspect of this project: it was *fun*. This project was my first real success in using Claude Code to build a digital text, and working iteratively with Claude Code, I was able to punch far above my weight class in designing the web text and its visualizations. Though some level of comfort working in a terminal is necessary, building your own digital texts without relying on Web 2.0-style templates has never been more accessible, and I strongly encourage you to review the [Reflections on AI Coding](https://garrett-ferrara.github.io/texts/fm_presentation_agentic-coding/) section of the project to see it in action.


As far as the academic goals of the project, two key components drove its design and production:


* Network Sense: Derek Mueller’s titular (underline)Network Sense: Methods for Visualizing a Discipline(/underline) provided the methodological framework for understanding disciplinary patterns through thin and distant reading - examining macro-level trends in scholarly conversation across hundreds of articles.


* AI Collaboration: Having used Claude Code for minor scripting projects, I wanted to explore how using an AI coding agent would impact my research in a project with different components that needed to work together.


Regarding Network Sense, I expect I will return to this book many times in the future for inspiration on conducting future research into larger bodies of text. One challenge of conducting such research is knowing when you need a data scientist involved and when you can responsibly interpret the data yourself. Network Sense offered an excellent middle ground, offering tools for visualizing and analyzing trends over time at a level before deeper quantitative or qualitative analysis is needed. This project highlighted several trends likely warranting such deeper investigation, and I’m excited to revisit this in the future.


As alluded to above, I think this project was a resounding success in highlighting AI collaboration in academic research. Despite much recent discussion on using AI to generate text and findings in academic research, I think using AI as a tool to generate code and transform data will be the most powerful way digital humanities researchers can implement AI into their workflows. Claude Code felt less like a shortcut and more like a force multiplier: it extended what I was capable of doing (albeit very slowly) on my own, but it still required me to direct the research questions, interpret the results, and shape the final narrative.


This project is almost certainly my favorite from my graduate school research. It was the first time I felt genuinely confident combining academic inquiry with coding, and the collaboration with Claude Code made the work feel accessible instead of intimidating. More importantly, it reminded me that multimodal scholarship can be creative and enjoyable, not just a requirement to fulfill. Building something interactive and research-driven felt like the clearest expression of what I’ve learned in the program.